Neuroprosthetics That Can Learn From the Patient.

Brain-Machine Interfaces (BMI) have been developed to allow numerous patients affected by various motor impairments, notably paralysis, experience movement. Patients who use BMIs can control artificial limbs through electrodes which are connected to their brains. Usually, however, these devices require significant training on the patient's part to learn to modulate their brain activity to convey all the necessary information and even then they are  restricted in what tasks they are able to perform.

A team of biomedical researchers from Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Lausanne, Switzerland and University of Zaragoza, Spain have conducted a study that produced a new, different type of BMI, a prosthesis that is capable of learning the proper movements based on Error-related potential - an electrical signal sent to the brain when we fail to make intended action. This new neuroprosthesis will understand the action wasn't successful and the next movements will change accordingly until the desired result is achieved. When the actions don't generate an Error-related potential anymore the device will recognise that the goal has been reached. So instead of adjusting a person's behaviour to operate the neuroprosthesis, the prosthesis will learn to adapt to the user and user's needs.

In the first phase of the experiment twelve healthy volunteers were asked to train their prosthesis to detect ErrP. Equipped with an electrode headset reading their brain activity , they watched the machine, programmed to fail in 20% of cases, perform 350 individual movements. The setting of the ErrP detector lasted on average 25 minutes. In the second phase , the subjects performed three different experiments to evaluate the effectiveness of the new approach. In the last one, they were asked to identify a specific target using a robotic arm placed two meters away.

Research team used Reinforcement Learning(RL) modeled by a Markov decision process (a mathematical process for decision making), where they took into account the possible positions of the device, the possible actions of the device, the goodness of the executed action at a given state and a time discount factor. In all three experiments performance was computed as the accuracy of decoding ErrP obtained in a sliding window of 10 actions and it came in as an average of 72.5% to 74.3%,a higher than chance occurence. We can conclude from this that neuroprosthesis demonstrated learning capabilities by steadily adapting its actions and increasing its precision and that this new approach could become a key element of the next generation brain-machine interfaces.

References:
 Iturrate, I. et al. Teaching brain-machine interfaces as an alternative paradigm to neuroprosthetics control. Sci. Rep. 5, 13893; doi: 10.1038/srep13893 (2015)
http://actu.epfl.ch/news/when-the-neuroprosthetics-learn-from-the-patient/
