Researchers at MIT have used the game manual from Sid Meier's Civilization II as the input for a machine learning system that infers meanings of words through interaction with an environment. Civilization II is a complex strategy game with an extensive 195 page manual.

The researchers wanted to demonstrate how a program could use text to learn the meaning of words, and chose Civilization II to test this knowledge because of it's complexity, and because the outcome of any given action is not predetermined. The program could not simply learn a series of actions to repeat every time the game was played, instead the program needed to learn to react appropriately to events.

The system used natural language as data, and began with no prior knowledge of either language or the game, but was instead provided a list of possible actions it could take, such as move cursor, left click, right click etc., and could gauge it's success depending on whether it won or lost the game.

Initially, the systems behaviour was random, but through comparing on screen text to text in the manual, it could begin to make assumptions about what words were tied to what actions and game objects. It would repeat actions that seemed to result in winning the game, and would abandon actions that consistently led to losing. The system won 46% of the time before the being given the manual, and 79% after.

A similar system used the instructions on a Microsoft website to install a piece of software, and was able to recreate 80% of the steps a human would. However, according to Regina Barzilay, associate professor of Computer Science and Electrical Engineering at MIT, the Civilization II example is impressive because unlike the instructions on Microsoft's website, in the case of the manual, "They don't tell you how to win. They just give you very general advice and suggestions, and you have to figure out a lot of other things on your own". Currently, game developers write game AI manually, but systems like these may allow for AI to be automatically generated.
