Article: Machine Learning Algorithm Predicts Which New Faces Will Make It as Fashion Models

Link: http://www.technologyreview.com/view/541036/machine-learning-algorithm-predicts-which-new-faces-will-make-it-as-fashion-models/

Summary:

Oscar Wilde once said that "fashion is a form of ugliness so intolerable that we have to alter it every six months". Not only is there a constant revolving door of styles and clothing in the fashion industry, but there is also the constant search for the "next big thing" of modeling. The issue of choosing the right fashion model from a choice of thousands for numerous magazine covers, social events, runway appearances, and any number of other jobs is a constant challenge for those in the industry. To try and find a solution to this problem, researches at Indiana University in Bloomington, Indiana USA have devised a machine learning algorithm to try and spot the factors that correlate with future modeling success. They hope to do this by measuring the number of runway appearances by each model as well as their popularity on social media.

To gather the data necessary for this project, the researchers downloaded the data associated with 431 female models who were listed as on the Fashion Model Directory, which is a highly respected industry listing website. The site gives various details about each model, such as name, age, weight, height, dress size, etc. It also lists each model's agency and their experience to date, such as magazine covers and number of runway appearances. As well as this, the team at Indiana University also gathered data regarding the presence of each of the models on Instagram, which is argubly the most influential social network in the fashion world. They collected all of the social posts for each account in the three months leading up to a particular fashion week, including the metadata of the posts such as the number of likes and comments on each photo they had uploaded. They even went as far as to calculate the sentiment of the comments to determine whether they were positive or negative.

Having collected the necessary data, the researchers used various machine learning algorithms to look for correlations between the models that had one or more runway appearances and those that had none. With these algorithms they found that various factors positively correlated with runway popularity, such as height and whether or not they are part of a top agency. Social media was also important. The more comments a model had on their Instagram account correlated with higher chance of them walking a runway. However, having more "likes" on their account reduced their chances by approximately 10 percent.

Having discovered these correlations with their machine learning algorithms, the researchers decided to use them to try and predict who would be successful at a future set of fashion weeks. They selected 15 new models and collected their personal and social media data. They then used their machine learning algorithms to predict which of the models would do one or more runway appearances and which would do none. The best machine learning algorithm that they had was able to correctly identify six of the eight models who would become popular on the runway. The study did have a number of weaknesses though, with the main issue being that the number of models that they selected (only 15) was a rather small data set to work with. Another limitation it had was that the results only apply to female models due to the lack of available data on male models.
