One of the biggest problems that the employees working on Google Maps faced was that they had to have addresses for houses on their API. They tried doing this manually at first but it was a slow process and was a waste of employees' time. Of course Google was smart about this and also had other humans doing the work for them by adding addresses into Recaptcha, their form of Captcha which is used to verify that a user is human.

Google addressed this problem by successfully training their artificial intelligence system known as "Google Brain" to do this task instead. It consists of an 11 layer neural network and is said to take 6 days to be trained into a system that recognises addresses with a high degree of accuracy. As humans could do this with a 98% degree of accuracy it was the aim of Google to reach the same mark with their system.

They trained it using the publicly available Street View House Numbers Dataset, which contains 200,000 addresses split into number blocks for a total of 600,000 images. The data was obtained by Google's Street View cars and they are simply small cropped images of addresses from Street View with labels 1 through 9 for the numbers 1 to 9 and the label 10 for 0. The images come in one of two different formats, the first format having each number bounded by a box and the second format having the image centred on a single character.

Google thought that solving this problem would not just be interesting because they could expand to other such things as recognising phone numbers or number plates, but also because it would save them so much time and money by speeding up and automating the process of going through addresses that used to be done by humans. Google claim that this neural network does not scale however and is really only useful for numbers of 5 digits or less as it reads the whole number at once, this works well for addresses which are rarely longer than 5 digits, but phone numbers are much longer and so this neural network would fail at the task of recognising the digits of a phone number. However they say that this form of using a single neural network as an end-to-end system could be used for speech recognition or text transcription. 
